Doug Oard &amp; Anton Leuski
Access to Archival Collections of Electronic Mail
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11 Large

Since its inception more than 30 years ago, electronic mail (email)
has developed into a powerful communication medium with applications
that extend well beyond simple asynchronous message exchange between
individuals. Automated tools to support the use of email in
individual, organizational and social contexts have received
increasing attention in recent years. Among the tasks that are now
supported are filtering (e.g., spam detection), aggregation (e.g.,
mailing list digests), workflow management (e.g., help desk routing),
and reuse (e.g., retrospective search). We are interested in how
today's email will be used in the future -- some will certainly be
preserved (indeed, some MUST be preserved!), and those records will
serve as powerful evidence of how we lived our lives and organized our
societies. The challenges of managing many types of electronic record
collections are receiving increasing attention, but we are not aware
of any work yet on supporting access to electronic mail archives.
That will be the focus of this talk.

We will introduce the Open Archival Information Systems (OAIS) model,
and then focus on two key processes: ingestion and access. Our focus
in ingestion is on support for review and redaction, which we believe
will be key enablers to acquisition and near-term access. For access,
we will address both browsing based on provenance (original order) and
user-guided reorganization based on search and visualization. Along
the way, we will identify potentially productive opportunities to
apply natural language processing technologies such as topic
segmentation, link detection, and summarization. We will then
describe two test collections, and demonstrate a system that we have
developed to explore user-guided reorganization through visualization
for one of those collections. We will conclude the talk by sketching
out a research agenda. At that point, we will expect suggestions and
comments from the audience. Knowing this audience, it is unlikely
that we will need to wait that long :-).

