Dina Demner-Fushman
Measuring the Effect of Dictionary Coverage on Cross-Language Retrieval
11:00 am - 12:00 pm
11 Large

Bilingual term lists have proven to be a useful basis for
dictionary-based Cross-Language Information Retrieval (CLIR), but
there is ample anecdotal evidence that differences in vocabulary
coverage can have a substantial impact on retrieval effectiveness.
This issue has recently been explored using ablation studies in which
progressively smaller term lists were synthesized using sampling
techniques. The ablation techniques used in those studies have not,
however, been validated using real terms lists. In this talk I will
report the results of what we believe is the first large coverage
study use naturally occurring term lists. Thirty-five bilingual terms
lists were obtained from a variety of sources, each with English as
one of the two paired languages. From these, we created 35
English-to-English term lists by taking each term that was present in
the English side of the list as its own translation. When used with
an English information retreval test collection, this allowed us to
measure the reduction in retrieval effectivenss that could be
attributed to deficiencies in the coverage of English terms. Eight
types of untranslatable terms were identified in a collection of news
stories, of which named entitles were found to have the greatest
impact on retrieval effectiveness. Differences in named entity
coverage were found to produce large differences in retrieval
effectiveness for term lists of similar sizes. Controlling for named
entity effects yielded a clear relationship between retrieval
effectiveness and the size of the translatable English vocabulary.
The functional dependence that we observed is consistent with one
previously applied ablation technique and inconsistent with another.
Our results indicate that the outcome of a widely cited landmark study
of query expansion effects for CLIR was likely affected by a flawed
ablation model. We conclude our talk with a suggestion for further
work on that topic, and a simple prescription for avoiding such
problems in the future.

