Dr. Kato and Dr. Fukomoto (NTCIR)
An Overview of the QA Challenge + NTCIR -- The Way Ahead
10:30 am - 12:00 pm
4th Floor

An Overview of Question Answering Challenge
Jun'ichi Fukumoto and Tsuneaki Kato

In this talk, we will present an overview of Question Answering
Challenge(QAC), which is the question answering task of the NTCIR
Workshop.  QAC-1 (the first evaluation of QAC) was carried out
at NTCIR Workshop 3 in October 2002, and QAC-2 will be at
NTCIR Workshop 4 in December 2003.  In the QAC, systems to be
evaluated are expected to return exact answers consisting of a noun
or noun compound denoting, for example, the names of persons,
organizations, or various artifacts or numerical expressions such
as money, size, or date.  Those basically range over the Named
Entity (NE) elements of MUC and IREX but is not limited to them.
  QAC consists of three kinds of subtasks: Task 1, where the systems
are allowed to return ranked five possible answers; Task 2, where
the systems are required to return a complete list of answers; and
Task 3, the systems are required to answer series of questions, that
have anaphora and zero-anaphora.  We will present the results of
QAC-1, and vision and prospect of QAC-2.

NTCIR -- the Way Ahead
Noriko Kando

Dr. Noriko Kando is the leader of NTCIR(Test Collections and Evaluation
of IR, Text Summarization, Q&A, etc) project, and an associate professor
of National Institute of Informatics (NII).  She got her Ph. D in 1995
from Keio University.  Her research interest includes evaluation of
information retrieval systems, technologies to "Make Information Usable
for Users", cross-lingual information retrieval, and analysis of text
structure, genre, citation & link  She is a member of editorial boards of
International Journal on Information Processing and Management,
ACM-Transaction on Asian Language Information Processing, etc.

Jun'ichi Fukumoto and Tsuneaki Kato are task organizers of QAC.
  Dr. Jun'ichi Fukumoto is an associate professor of Ritsumeikan
University.  He got his Ph. D in 1999 from University of Manchester
Institute of Science and Technology.  His research interest includes
Q&A, automatic summarization, and dialogue processing.
Dr. Tsuneaki Kato is an associate professor of the University of Tokyo.
He got his Dr. of Engineering in 1995 from Tokyo Institute of
Technology.  His research interests includes multimodal dialogue
processing, multimodal presentation generation and domain independent
question and answering.  He is a member of editorial committee of
transaction on information and systems of The Institute of Electronics,
Information and Communication Engineers.

