Christopher Manning (Stanford)
Natural Language Parsing: Graphs, the A* Algorithm, and Modularity
10:00 am - 11:00 am
11 Large

Probabilistic parsing methods have in recent years transformed our ability to
robustly find correct parses for open domain sentences.  Much of this work has
been within a common architecture of heuristic search for good pares in
lexicalized probabilistic context-free grammars, with many layers of back-off
to avoid problems of sparse data. 

In this talk, I will outline some different ideas that we have been pursuing. 
I will connect stochastic parsing with finding shortest paths in hypergraphs,
and show how this approach naturally provides a chart parser for arbitrary
probabilistic context-free grammars (finding shortest paths in a hypergraph is
easy; the central problem of parsing is that the hypergraph has to be
constructed on the fly). From this viewpoint, a natural approach is to use the
A* algorithm to cut down the work in finding the best parse. On unlexicalized
grammars, this can reduce the parsing work done dramatically, by at least 97%.
This approach is competitive with methods standardly used in statistical
parsers, while ensuring optimality, unlike most heuristic approaches to
best-first parsing. 

Finally, I will present a novel modular generative model in which semantic
(lexical dependency) and syntactic structures are scored separately. This
factored model is conceptually simple, linguistically interesting, admits exact
inferenence with an extremely effective A* algorithm, and provides
straightforward opportunities for separately improving the component models. In
particular, I will mention some of the work we have done focusing on the PCFG
component to produce a very high accuracy unlexicalized grammar. 

This is joint work with Dan Klein. 

About the Speaker:

Christopher Manning is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science and
Linguistics at Stanford University. He received his Ph.D. from Stanford
University in 1995, and served on the faculty of the Computational Linguistics
Program at Carnegie Mellon University (1994-1996) and the University of Sydney
Linguistics Department (1996-1999) before returning to Stanford. His research
interests include probabilistic models of language, natural language parsing,
constraint-based linguistic theories, syntactic typology, information
extraction and text mining, and computational lexicography. He is the author of
three books, including Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing
(MIT Press, 1999, with Hinrich Schuetze). 

Chris' schedule is available in <a href="manning.ps">Postscript</a> or
<a href="manning.pdf">PDF</a> format.
