Justin Busch, Hai Huang, Jens Stephan & Chen-kang Yang
CL Student Presentations
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

Justin Busch:
Weight and Semantic Class Issues in Japanese Noun Phrase Ordering

Many current designs for automatic parsers learn probabilities for the
relative frequencies of parts-of-speech and syntactic rules, and this has
proven to be generally reliable. In spite of the ubiquity of probabilistic
techniques for parsing, however, little attention has been given to the
linguistic significance of the probabilistic data and what it might say
about human performance.

Hawkins proposes a general theory of grammaticalization based on the
minimization of syntactic domains. Given that a sentence of any language
will contain at least one noun phrase, one verb, and possibly additional
noun phrases and prepositional phrases, "minimize domains" suggests that
these phrases will order themselves according to whichever pattern
requires the least effort to recognize the higher syntactic structure of
the sentence. These effects are directly measurable through corpus
statistics, and can be interpreted as potential heuristics for
probabilistic parsers.  In this study, we examine Japanese data from the
Kyoto Treebank and test Hawkins' predictions for noun phrase ordering by
noun phrase weight as well as by generic semantic types. The discussion
will focus primarily on how accurately Hawkins' predictions are reflected
in the corpus statistics, and will conclude with observations about how
they might be applied to the decision mechanisms of probabilistic parsers.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hai Huang:
TBA

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jens Stephan:
Evaluation and Visualization of a Dialogue System

Evaluations have become a necessary standard to almost any type of
research. However, there are many areas where there is no common agreement
on how to evaluate, which is the case for complex problem of evaluating
dialogue systems. The evaluation of the multi party multi modal dialogue
system MRE(1) provides a good example of what questions are important for
such an evaluation, how to actually do the evaluation and finally how to
how make special problems of the system visible to use the evaluation
results to improve the systems performance.

After a brief introduction of the MRE domain and architecture, I will
break the task town to a set of general evaluation questions. From there I
will explain what kinds of metrics and visualizations are suited to answer
those questions and what kind of data is needed, as well as how that data
was obtained. Along the road, examples of actual system problems and
performances will be presented. The topics of data formatting and
visualization will receive some special attention by introducing the MRE
Evaluation Toolkit as well as the corpus it operates on.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chen-kang Yang:
Using the Omega Ontology to Determine Selectional Restrictions for Word Sense Disambiguation

Word sense disambiguation is fundamental for language processing. Though
purely statistical methods are effective for this task, they neglect the
syntactic and semantic aspects. In this study, we adopt a hybrid approach
by applying an unsupervised machine learning method to learn verbs
selectional restrictions on their subjects/objects. The system then uses
these learned selectional restrictions for word sense disambiguation of
the subjects/objects. Instead of words, the training data contains
ontological taxonomy hierarchies that are retrieved from the Omega
ontology. Unlike other similar systems, we are able to automatically find
the best match among classes from different levels of the ontology. This
provides us more flexibility and is closer to human instinct. Our system
performs better than other similar systems, though it still needs
cooperating methods for better results.
