Paul Kingsbury (Penn)
PropBank: the next stage of Treebank <b>and</b><br>Inducing a Chronology of the Pali Canon
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

PropBank: the next stage of Treebank

Natural-language engineers the world over are coming to a consensus that a
degree of semantic knowledge is a necessary addition to purely structural
representations of language.  This talk describes the Propbank project at
Penn, which provides a complete shallow semantic parse of the Treebank II
corpus.

Inducing a Chronology of the Pali Canon:

Works such as Kroch (1989), Taylor (1994) and Han (2000) have demonstrated
that syntactic change can be described mathematically as the competition
between innovating and archaic formations.  This paper demonstrates how
this same mathematical description can be turned around to predict the
date of a historical text.  The Middle Indic period showed dramatic change
in the morphological system, such as the collapse of the past-tense verbal
system.  Whereas Sanskrit had three competing formations, each with
multiple possible morphological realizations, Pali (a Middle Indo-Aryan
language) had only a single formation, based mostly on the sigmatic aorist
although many archaic nonsigmatic aorists are also attested.  The
proportions of the archaic and innovative forms can be easily calculated
for each text in the Pali Canon and these proportions used to assign an
approximate date for each text.  The accuracy of the method can be
assessed qualitatively by comparing the derived chronology to chronologies
based on various non-linguistic criteria, or quantitatively by comparing
the derived chronology to a known dating scheme.  For the latter it is
necessary to turn to a different dataset, such as that describing the rise
of do-support in Early Modern English, as described in Ellegard (1953) and
Kroch (1989).

Bio:

Paul Kingsbury graduated summa cum laude in linguistics from Ohio State
University in 1993 with a thesis on "Some sources for L-words in
Sanskrit".  He subsequently entered the University of Pennsylvania to
study historical linguistics and Sanskrit, but (like most historical
students) was diverted to computational issues.  He joined the Propbank
project in 2000 and soon thereafter engineered a major rethinking of the
methods and goals of the project, in order to make the annotation
linguistically meaningful.  He completed his doctorate in 2002 with a
thesis entitled 'The Chronology of the Pali Canon: the case of the
aorist'.

