Jon Patrick (U. of Sydney)
ScamSeek: Capturing Financial Scams at the Coalface by Language Technology
10:30 am - 12:00 pm
11 Large

The Scamseek project aims to build a surveillance tool for identifying
financial scams on the Internet by performing document classification of
Internet pages. There are three principle types of documents of concern:
those that give financial advice by unregistered advisors, unlawful
investment schemes, and share ramping.

The first phase of the project has been completed and a working system,
known as ScamAlert installed at the Australian Securities and Investment
Commission (ASIC). The independent audit of the performance of the system
proved satisfactory with a result for precision of .75, recall .43, and
F=. 54, along with identification of 4 scams misclassified by the client.
Significant improvement in recall is foreshadowed in the 2nd phase of the
project.  The results are satisfying in the context of the structure of
the data where the density of scam documents is about 1.8% of the total
corpus.

The good performance of the operational system is ascribed to the
combination of using a strong linguistic model of language (Systemic
Functional Linguistics) to define the scam documents in parallel with a
rich statistical analysis of the structure of non-scam documents and scam
look-alikes. A large amount of the experimental program has concentrated
on understanding and exploiting the interaction between the linguistically
described aspects of the documents and the statistical properties. Each
type of data has been used to inform and modify the usage of the other.

The operational aspects of the project have proven to be as challenging as
the research objectives. The project has a budget of $2.2M over 15 months.
It has been managed so as to create a balance in resources between the
needs of both the research objectives and the engineering objectives.
Software development has concentrated on three aspects. Firstly, to
produce an environment for the strong directive management of
computational linguistics experiments, secondly, in the aid of the
linguists to create tools to support their manual analysis, and thirdly
the best practice of software engineering principles to ensure a clean
automated rollout of the production system for ASIC.

The contributing partners in the Scamseek project are The Capital Markets
Co-operative Research Centre (CMCRC), ASIC, the University of Sydney and
Macquarie University.
