Dragomir Radev
Words, links, and patterns: novel representations for Web-scale text mining
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

Textual data is everywhere, in email and scientific papers, in online
newspapers and e-commerce sites. The Web contains more than 200 terabytes
of text not even counting the contents of dynamic textual databases. This
enormous source of knowledge is seriously underexploited. Textual
documents on the Web are very hard to model computationally: they are
mostly unstructured, time-dependent, collectively authored, multilingual,
and of uneven importance.  Traditional grammar-based techniques don't
scale up to address such problems. Novel representations and analytical
tools are needed.

I will discuss several current projects at Michigan related to text mining
from a variety of genres. Depending on the amount of time, I will talk
about (a) lexical centrality for multidocument summarization, (b)
syntax-based sentence alignment, (c) graph-based classification,(d)
lexical models of Web growth, and (e) mining protein interactions from
scientific papers. As it turns out, the right representations, when
complemented with traditional NLP and IR techniques, turn many of these
into instances of better studied problems in areas such as social
networks, statistical mechanics, sequence analysis, and computational
phylogenetics.



About the Speaker:

Dragomir R. Radev is Assistant Professor of Information, Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, and Linguistics at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.  He leads the CLAIR (Computational Lingusitics
And Information Retrieval) group which currently includes 12
undergraduate and graduate students.  Dragomir holds a Ph.D. in
Computer Science from Columbia University.  Before joining Michigan,
he was a Research Staff Member at IBM's TJ Watson Research Center in
Hawthorne, NY.  He is the author of more than 45 papers on information
retrieval, text summarization, graph models of the Web, question
answering, machine translation, text generation, and information
extraction.  Dr. Radev's current research on probabilistic and
link-based methods for exploiting very large textual repositories,
representing and acquiring knowledge of genome regulation, and
semantic entity and relation extraction from Web-scale text document
collections is supported by NSF and NIH.  Dragomir serves on the
HLT-NAACL advisory committee, was recently reelected as treasurer of
NAACL, is a member of the editorial boards of JAIR and Information
Retrieval, and is a four-time finalist at the ACM international
programming finals (as contestant in 1993 and as coach in
1995-1997). Dragomir received a graduate teaching award at Columbia
and recently, the U. of Michigan award for Outstanding Research
Mentorship (UROP).

