Hopkins, Riesa, and Nakov
Summer Student Presentations
3:30 pm - 5:00 pm
11 Large

3:30pm  Mark Hopkins (UCLA)
Tree Sequence Automata: A Unifying Framework for Tree Relation Formalisms

There exist a wide variety of competing formalisms for representing a
language of ordered tree pairs.  These include (bottom-up and top-down)  
tree transducers, synchronous tree-substitution grammars (STSGs),
synchronous tree-adjoining grammars (STAGs), and inversion transduction
grammars (ITGs).  Since these formalisms have all developed independently
of one another, it is difficult to compare their respective
representational power.  This work seeks to make this task simpler by
viewing these formalisms as instances of a general unifying formalism,
which we call tree sequence automata (TSA).  By casting these different
formalisms in a single framework, we can compare them directly by studying
the specific subclass of TSA that they fall into.

4:00pm  Jason Riesa (Johns Hopkins)
A case study in building a cost-effective speech-to-speech machine translation system with sparse resources: English - Iraqi Arabic

The Arabic spoken dialect of Iraq is a language deprived of the vast
resources that researchers enjoy when working with its written
counterpart, Modern Standard Arabic (MSA). The Iraqi Arabic lexicon and
grammar are also sufficiently distinct so that the use of existing tools
or corpora for MSA yield little or no positive effect on machine
translation output quality.  One can see that building a machine
translation system normally dependent on a large parallel corpus is a
particularly difficult task when given just a 37,000 line translated
parallel text based on transcribed speech. This talk will explore the
constraints involved in working with this type of data, how we endeavored
to mitigate such problems as a non-standard orthography and a highly
inflected grammar, and propose a cost- effective way for dealing with such
projects in the future.

4:30pm  Preslav Nakov (UC Berkeley)
Multilingual Word Alignment

Recently there has been a growing number of available multilingual
parallel texts. One such source is the European Union, which publishes its
official documents in the official languages of all member states
(sometimes also in the languages of the candidates). Another source are
the United Nations. These corpora are a great source of training data for
machine translation between new language pairs. But they also offer the
opportunity to obtain better pairwise word alignments by looking at
multiple languages in parallel. In this talk I will present my research as
a summer intern at ISI on getting better French (Fr) to English (En) word
alignments using an additional language (Xx). First, I will introduce two
heuristics which start with pairwise alignments between Fr-Xx, En-Xx and
Fr-En and then combine them probabilistically (in a linear model) or
graph-theoretically (by looking at in- and out-degrees for each word).  
Then I will present two Model1 inspired alignment models: (a) from "Fr and
Xx" to En; and (b) from Fr to "En and Xx".
