Fossum, Huang and Zhang
Summer Student Presentations
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

3:00pm  Victoria Fossum (Michigan)
Exploring the Continuum between Phrase-based and Syntax-based Machine Translation

State-of-the-art statistical machine translation systems use lexical
phrases as the basic unit of translation.  Phrase-based systems can
capture those aspects of translation that are sensitive to local context.  
Syntax-based systems, on the other hand, make use of linguistically
motivated syntactic structure, can capture long-distance dependencies and
reorderings, and offer greater generalization in translation rules.  
However, their performance lags that of phrase-based systems.

Hierarchical phrase-based translation, introduced by [Chiang 05], provides
an elegant framework for exploring the continuum between phrase-based and
syntax-based translation.  This system combines the "formal machinery" of
syntax-based systems without any "linguistic commitment" to a particular
syntactic structure [Chiang 05].

I will present results from my re-implementation of Chiang's hierarchical
phrase-based system, and (if time permits) compare those results with the
following systems on Chinese-English translation: ISI's phrase-based
system, and ISI's syntax-based system.  Between now and December 2005, I
plan to incrementally explore the space between phrase-based and
syntax-based systems by augmenting these hierarchical phrase-based rules
with richer syntactic annotation.


3:30pm  Liang Huang (Penn) and Hao Zhang (Rochester)
Efficient Integration of n-gram Language Models with Syntax-based Decoding

We first give an overview of the ISI syntax-based MT system which is based
on tree-to-string (xRs) translation rules. The biggest problem at this
stage is the inefficiency of the integration of n-gram models.  Without
n-gram models, the xRs translation rules can be easily binarized with
respect to the foreign language to ensure cubic-time decoding. With n-gram
models, however, binarization without considering both languages will lead
to exponential complexity.

Inspired by Inversion Transduction Grammar (ITG) (Wu, 97), we will focus
on the so-called ITG binarizable rules which count for over 99% of the
whole rule set. A simple linear-time algorithm will be presented to do the
binarization. Decoding with ITG-like rules is of low polynomial complexity
in both time and space. We will discuss experimental results on both
efficiency and accuracy of decoding with the new binarization.  If time
permits, we will also present the "hook trick" (inspired by (Eisner and
Satta, 99)) to even further reduce the polynomial complexity of the
decoding process.
