Birte Loenneker (Hamburg)
Between Story Generation and Natural Language Generation
10:00 am - 11:30 am
11 Small

Narratology analyzes the discursive structure of narratives as finalized
products of human invention, such as novels, short-stories, or
fairy-tales. Those narratives are rendered in a given surface form;
Narratology focuses on narratives in natural language. Narratologists
assume that each narrative surface representation is associated with a
neutral, abstract event sequence, the "Story" (histoire, sjuzhet). The
abstractness of Story is illustrated by the fact that the same Story can
be realized in different surface texts. By discursive structure or
"Discourse" (discours, fabula), narralogists mean the relation between an
abstract Story and its concrete expression in a sequential text. For
example, if the chronological order of the Story is not respected in its
textual recount, we are dealing with the Discourse parameter of order.
Other Discourse parameters include the frequency with which Story events
are evoked, the point of view from which they are narrated (perceived,
evaluated,...), or framed narratives with several narrative levels.

The Story Generator Algorithms project at the University of Hamburg
evaluated several existing Story Generators with respect to their
discursive abilities. It became obvious that most Story Generators
concentrate on creating a coherent and chronological abstract Story,
which is directly mapped onto natural language. This results in a
predominance of 1:1 relations between Story and surface, and in most
cases corresponds to a default or zero instantiation of Discourse
parameters. As a consequence, Story Generator outputs tend to be very
explicit and straightforward, and are likely to be perceived as uniform
and boring.

Narratological expert knowledge might be useful to future enhanced Story
Generators and to Natural Language Generation systems dealing with
narrative. One of the aims of Computational Narratology is to model that
expert knowledge. Ideally, narratological knowledge will be integrated
into a Narratological Structurer, as a processing component of an
advanced system that creates narratives. In such a system, the
Narratological Structurer will be the interface between a Story Generator
and subsequent Natural Language Generation modules. The talk also
presents examples of the knowledge that is being modelled.


About the Speaker:

Birte Lönneker graduated from the University of Hamburg, Germany, with a
degree in French with Finno-Ugristics (Finnish) and Business
Administration. Since then, her main fields of publication are Cognitive
Linguistics and electronic resources for Natural Language Processing,
with special focus on frames and metaphors, as well as electronic
dictionaries, corpora, and recently part-of-speech tagging. Her PhD on
Concept Frames and Relations, also published as a book in 2003, was
co-supervised at the Institute for Romance Languages and at the
Department of Informatics in Hamburg. For her Slovenian-German online
dictionary, Birte Lönneker was twice awarded the EURALEX Laurence Urdang
Award. From 2002 to 2004, she received various research grants for
Slovenia, where she was working in the Corpus Laboratory of the Institute
of Slovenian Language.

Since 2004, Birte Lönneker carries out research on Story Generator
Algorithms within the Narratology Research Group Hamburg. She is also a
board member of the German Cognitive Linguistics Association.

