Alessandro Moschitti (Rome)
Kernel Methods for Semantic Role Labeling
2:00 pm - 3:30 pm
11 Large

Automatic Natural Language applications often require the processing of
structured data. Traditional machine learning approaches attempt to
represent structured syntactic/semantic objects by means of flat feature
representations, i.e. attribute-value vectors. This raises two problems:

1. There is no well defined theoretical motivation for such feature model.
Structural properties may not fit in any flat feature representation.

2. To define effective flat features, a deep knowledge about the
linguistic phenomenon is required.

Kernel methods for Natural Language Processing aim to solve both the above
problems as kernel functions can be used to define similarities between
linguistic objects without explicitly defining the target feature space.  
In this way, a linguistic phenomenon can be modeled at a more abstract
level where the modeling is easier. Such property is extremely useful when
the representation of linguistic phenomena is still not well understood.
For example, the feature design of semantic role labeling appear to be
quite complex since several and non-definitive feature sets have been
proposed.

As a viable alternative to manual feature design, kernel methods propose
two steps: (1) they generate all substructures of the target
syntactic/semantic structures and (2) they let the learning algorithm
(e.g. Support Vector Machines) to select the most relevant substructures.
In this talk, we (1) introduce the PropBank and FrameNet predicate
argument structures, (2) present the standard approaches to the automatic
labeling of semantic roles and (3) show advanced semantic role labeling
models based on kernel methods.

About the speaker:

Alessandro Moschitti is a researcher at the Computer Science Department of
the University of Rome ^ÓTor Vergata^Ô. In 1998 he took his master degree
in Computer Science at the University of Rome ^ÓLa Sapienza^Ô. In 2003 he
finished his PhD in Computer Science at ^ÓTor Vergata^Ô University.  
Between 2002 and 2004 he worked as an associate researcher in the
University of Texas at Dallas. His research interests concern machine
learning approaches for Natural Language Processing and Information
Retrieval. His deep expertise relates to automated text categorization and
semantic role labeling.  Recently, he has devised new kernels which enable
Support Vector and other kernel-based machines to carry out advanced
semantic processing.


