Nick Mote and Donghui Feng
Pedagogical Contextualization of Language Learner Speech Errors AND Learning to Detect Conversation Focus of Threaded Discussions
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

This is two practice talks.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
FIRST TALK:

The traditional approach to diagnosing learner speech errors in Computer
Aided Language Learning is to create a linguistic profile of the
learner/user. We, however, propose that work must also be done to model
the linguistic profile of a typcial native listener.

Not all errors in second langage learner speech are created equal.
Different errors sound more "severe" or "harsh" to native speaker ears and
should therefore be treated with more emphasis in pedagogical interaction.

The Tactical Language Training System (TLTS) is a speech-enabled
virtual-reality based computer learning environment designed to teach
Arabic spoken communication to American English speakers. This talk
addresses the ways the TLTS contextualizes non-native speech errors, and
how this contextualization fits in the corrective exchanges between a
non-native learner and a pedagogical agent built to model a native
listener.

The pedagogical system used in TLTS includes:

  * Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) models which are built on a
    combination of both annnotated and unannotated non-native speech with
    native speech data.

  * A stochastic generative model for errors in learner speech that
    creates mispronunciation grammars for the ASR

  * Reweighting of system-perceived mispronunciation severity based on
    aggregate native speaker judgements of quality pronunciation and
    intelligiblity.

  * Contextualization of feedback based on lexical and phonetic
    inventories of the native and non-native languages.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
SECOND TALK:

We present a novel feature-enriched approach that learns to detect the
conversation focus of threaded discussions by combining NLP analysis and
IR techniques. Using the graph-based algorithm HITS, we integrate
different features such as lexical similarity, poster trustworthiness, and
speech act analysis of human conversations with featureoriented link
generation functions. It is the first quantitative study to analyze human
conversation focus in the context of online discussions that takes into
account heterogeneous sources of evidence. Experimental results using a
threaded discussion corpus from an undergraduate class show that it
achieves significant performance improvements compared with the baseline
system.
