Anoop Sarkar (Simon Fraser)
Extensions of Regular Tree Grammars and their relation to Tree Adjoining Grammars
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

There is a hierarchy of generative devices that generate trees:
starting with regular tree languages (RTLs), which are contained
within context-free tree languages (CFTLs), and so on.  The string
yield of the RTLs is exactly the set of Context-Free Languages,
while the yield of the CFTLs is exactly the set of Indexed Languages.
In this talk we introduce Adjoining Tree Languages (ATLs) which sit
in between RTLs and CFTLs.

The yield of ATGs is exactly the set of Tree-Adjoining Languages.
Just like RTGs are stronger than CFGs, ATGs are stronger than TAGs.
In addition we will show that the ATG notation simplifies many of
the foundational proofs for TAGs including proofs of the closure
properties. In particular, ATLs do not use adjunction constraints,
and thus are much easier to understand than TAGs.

We compare ATGs with previously proposed simplifications of CFTGs,
called monadic simple CFTGs, which also have been shown to be weakly
equivalent to TAG (i.e. they generate the same set of string
languages). We consider the question of whether these two weakly
equivalent formalisms are strongly equivalent (i.e. generate exactly
the same set of tree languages).

Finally, we will show that the standard definition used for
probabilistic TAG is (surprisingly) very different from the natural
definition of probabilistic ATL. Using an example of PP-attachment
ambiguity we show that the two probabilistic models are different
from each other. 

About the speaker:

Anoop Sarkar is an assistant professor in the Department of Computing
Science at Simon Fraser University. He received his PhD in 2002
from the Department of Computer and Information Science at the
University of Pennsylvania, with Prof. Aravind Joshi as his advisor.
His research work is on machine learning, especially semi-supervised
learning, applied to the processing of natural language and stochastic
formal grammars.

Anoop Sarkar's web-page: <a href=http://www.cs.sfu.ca/~anoop/> http://www.cs.sfu.ca/~anoop</a>
