Marieke van Erp
MITCH: Mining for Information in Texts from the Cultural Heritage
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

Naturalis, the Dutch National Museum of Natural History, harbours one of the largest treasures of the world: the key specimens of millions of animals found throughout the world through centuries of biological expeditions. While the depot where the animals are stored is a technical marvel, Noah's ark of the 21st century, it is hard to search through it. Research in taxonomy, the evolution of life and biodiversity revolves around the specimens in the depot. The main key to accessing the depot are(mostly) handwritten expedition logs and registration books, which are currently being photographed and keyed in to be stored in searchable digital archives. Such digital logs already enable a kind of "Biogoogle" search, but actual research questions are more complicated ("how did this kind of frog develop over the last century in the Amazon rainforests?"), and demand more intelligent handling. This is where the MITCH project comes in.

The goal of MITCH is to turn the field logs and registration books into a populated semantic network, in which concepts such as animal specimens are related to all other concepts that define them: where, when, under which circumstances and by whom were they found, who described them first in the academic literature, who prepared them for storage in the Naturalis depot, which registration number was assigned to them, etc. This means that all textual descriptions of a specimen need to be parsed into exactly these concepts and their relations. All of this needs to be  done at a scale that goes far beyond the human capacity, as tens of thousands of digitized but unanalysed textual records are waiting for semantic analysis. This necessitates the use of state-of-the-art machine learning methods that learn from examples automatically.

The project addresses its goals on three levels. The basic level is the development and application of automatic data cleaning and markup tools. On top of this, semi-structured textual material such as fieldbook logs and scientific papers, are semi-automatically converted to a searchable knowledge base. Search results are visualised by displaying maps and specimen photos. The conversion phase assumes the active intervention of domain experts, such as collection managers, to correct and steer the automatic extraction  procedure. At the top level, information resources are cross-linked using a domain ontology, populating a semantic network that can be hooked up to any other standardised cultural heritage knowledge base or to a search engine. 