Hermann Helbig (U at Hagen, Germany)
Multilayered Extended Semantic Networks as a Knowledge Representation Paradigm and Interlingua for Meaning Representation 
3:00 pm - 4:30 pm
4 CR

The talk gives an overview of  Multilayered Extended Semantic Networks
(abbreviated MultiNet), which is one of the most comprehensively
described knowledge representation paradigms used as a semantic
interlingua in large-scale NLP applications and for linguistic
investigations into the semantics and pragmatics of natural
language. As with other semantic networks, concepts are represented in
MultiNet by nodes, and relations between concepts are represented as
arcs between these nodes. Additionally to that, every node is
classified according to a predefined conceptual ontology forming a
hierarchy of sorts, and the nodes are embedded in a multidimensional
space of layer attributes and their values. MultiNet provides a set of
about 150 standardized relations and functions which are described in
a very concise way including an axiomatic apparatus, where the axioms
are classified according to predefined types. The representational
means of MultiNet claim to fulfill the criteria of universality,
homogeneity, and cognitive adequacy. In the talk, it is also shown,
how MultiNet can be used for the semantic representation of different
semantic phenomena. To overcome the quantitative barrier in building
large knowledge bases and semantically oriented computational lexica,
MultiNet is associated with a set of tools including a semantic
interpreter NatLink for automatically translating natural language
expressions into MultiNet networks, a workbench LIA for the computer
lexicographer, and a workbench MWR for the knowledge engineer for
managing and graphically manipulating semantic networks. The
applications of MultiNet as a semantic interlingua range from natural
language interfaces to the Internet and to dedicated databases, over
question-answering systems, to systems for automatic knowledge
acquisition.

About the speaker:

Prof. Helbig is head of the chair Intelligent Information and Communication 
Systems at the University of Hagen, Germany. His main research areas are
Knowledge Representation, Semantic Natural Language Processing, and 
Question-Answering.

A CV can be found <a href="slides/CV-En-HH.pdf"> here</a>.
