Jon Patrick (Univ. of Sydney)
Enhancement Technologies for ICU Information Systems
3:30 pm - 4:30 pm
11 Large

The School of Information Technologies at the University of Sydney has
had a 3 year partnership with the Intensive Care Unit at the Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney. In that time they have managed 8 joint
projects aimed at producing software solutions that enhance
productivity in the Unit and in some cases enabled entirely new
functionalities in their information systems. The principle motivation
for the research is the processing of the narratives in clinical notes
but concomitant problems in information systems have also been tackled
and the combination of the two disciplines have led to the two related
processing systems to be described in this presentation.


- Ward Rounds Information Systems (WRIS) & Handovers -
The WRIS is designed to support the work of all clinical staff in
their ward rounds activities. The system, when activated,
automatically populates from the resident clinical database a pro
forma report with the most recent relevant data about the patient,
such as vital signs, pathology reports, and other diagnostic
measurements, presented as a web page. The clinical staff then write
their progress notes into the web page which converts the text to
SNOMED CT codes and other relevant concepts and entities. The
clinician is given the opportunity to change any analyses done by the
processor. This clinician approved data is loaded to the patient
record. The essential elements of this system, that is computing an
extract of the patient record, accepting narrative input, and
analysing the text for coding, is a productivity gain of itself, but
more importantly, also constitutes the beginning of a hospital wide
Handovers System for use throughout each step in the patient
journey. This system is being tested at the RPAH ICU in readiness for
ward usage. The impact of this system in improving the quality and
safety of handovers has the potential to be very significant.


- Clinical Data Analytics Language (CDAL) -
General purpose access to data from clinical information systems,
beyond retrieval for point of care work, is needed for many aspects of
the hospital's work particularly for clinical research, logistics &
operational planning, and auditing patient safety. Most current
clinical systems only provide access to data identified in standard
reports with no flexibility to make ad hoc enquiries or to pursue new
directions of enquiry. The clinical data analytics language developed
enables the expression of any question that can be answered from the
data in the database in a restricted natural language. A prototype of
the language has been developed for the CareVue information system
used in the ICU at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. It provides for
the use of local medical dialects, SNOMED CT terminology including all
forms of collective expressions in SNOMED (e.g. infectious diseases),
specification of patient groups, a variety of statistical functions,
and constraints over any medical variable, Time, and Location. CDAL is
general in that it can be bolted on to any clinical information system
and is applicable to any clinical specialisation.



