Paramveer Dhillon (Penn)
Transfer Learning for WSD & Non-local constraints for Named Entity Recognition
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11 Large

This talk will be divided into two parts. In the first part I will
talk about using Transfer Learning techniques to improve the task of
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD).
Usually in supervised WSD, we suffer due to paucity of labeled data as
there are some words that occur less frequently in the data and its
very difficult to get enough labeled data for these words. In such
cases it is very difficult to build high accuracy supervised learning
models for these words. So, we propose an approach called TransFeat
(based on the MDL principle) which ``transfers information", from
similar words in the form of a feature relevance prior to get improved
accuracies on these rare words. Besides this, our experiments show
that we also get decent improvement in accuracy for words that have
more amount of labeled data available. TransFeat gives accuracies that
are in the worst case comparable to state-of-the-art on ONTONOTES and
SENSEVAL-2 datasets.

In the second part of the talk I will talk about incorporating
non-local constraints in Named Entity Recognition (NER) systems. The
main idea is that some linguistic constraints (e.g. every occurrence
of the word ``Einstein" in the data should have the tag PER
i.e. person ) are very useful and can give improved performance but
they are non - local and hence are intractable and can not be
efficiently modeled using state-of-the-art sequence modeling methods
like CRFs. Though people have used Skip-chain CRFs (with Loopy
BP)(Sutton and McCallum '04) and Gibbs Sampling (Finkel and Manning
'05) to enforce these non-local constraints, but they turn out to be
really inefficient and custom-tailored to one particular kind of
constraints (say) consistency constraints of the type mentioned
above. We propose a constrained version of EM in which a general set
of constraints (not limited to consistency constraints!) can be
incorporated into the model. In the end I will show some results of
this approach on CoNLL 03 English and CoNLL 02 Spanish NER shared tasks.
