Satoshi Sekine (NYU)
On-Demand Information Extraction and Knowledge Discovery
10:30 am - 11:30 am
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

At present, adapting an Information Extraction system to new topics is
an expensive and slow process, requiring some knowledge engineering for
each new topic. We propose a new paradigm of Information Extraction
which operates 'on demand' in response to a user's query. On-demand
Information Extraction (ODIE) aims to completely eliminate the
customization effort. Given a user's query, the system will
automatically create patterns to extract salient relations in the text
of the topic, and build tables from the extracted information using
paraphrase discovery technology. It relies on recent advances in pattern
discovery, paraphrase discovery, and extended named entity tagging.
I will show you a demo system, which produce a table in less than a
minute for any give queries.

I will also explain the need of linguistic knowledge and introduce some
weakly supervised learning methods. I will show a demo of the ngram
search engine, which extracts ngrams and sentences which match to a
query with arbitrary wildcard.

Also, I will give a brief introduction about the Web People Search.
It is a task to disambiguate search results of people name and people
attribute extraction task. We organized WePS1 and 2, and currently
started the third evaluation, which includes 2 tasks: 1) the combined
task of people disambiguation and attribute extraction and 2)
organization disambiguation from twitter messages.

Brief Bio:

Satoshi Sekine is an Research Associate Professor at New York University.
He received his MSc at UMIST, UK in 1992 and his PhD in 1998 at NYU. He
has been working on various topics, including parsing, NE, Information
Extraction and minimally supervised knowledge discovery. He edited a book
about NE from John Benjamins, organized a JHU summer workshop 2009, 
WePS task, NSF symposium on Semantic Knowledge Discovery, Organization
and Use in 2008, workshop on Textual Entailment and Parsing 2007 and so on.

