Elsi Kaiser (USC)
Discourse coherence effects in language processing: A psycholinguistic approach
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

In this talk I will discuss some recent results from my lab on the relationship between reference resolution and coherence relations. Previous work found that pronoun interpretation is guided by the coherence relations between clauses (e.g., 'as a result', 'and then', 'and similarly'), e.g. Hobbs (1979), Kehler et al. (2008). For example, consider "Phil tickled Stan, and similarly Liz poked him" (preference to interpret 'him' as Stan) and "Phil tickled Stan, and as a result Liz poked him" (more consideration of Phil as the antecedent of 'him'). However, the linguistic and cognitive properties of these coherence representations are not yet fully understood, and it is also not yet clear whether this kind of coherence sensitivity extends straightforwardly to other kinds of reduced referring expressions in addition to pronouns (e.g. anaphoric demonstratives, which can in many languages be used to refer to humans as well). I will discuss experiments -- conducted using a visual-world eye-tracking paradigm as well as other methods -- that investigate the nature and generality of these coherence representations. In addition to investigating whether coherence effects extend to other reduced referring expressions, I have also explored the domain-generality of coherence representations, for example whether non-linguistic, visuo-spatial input (video clips of moving shapes) can prime (bias) subsequent reference resolution in a seemingly unrelated task. Time permitting, I will also discuss issues related to data analysis and the annotation of data collected through psycholinguistic experiments.

Brief bio: 

Elsi Kaiser is an Assistant Professor of Linguistics at the University of
Southern California, with a specialization in Psycholinguistics. She
received her Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania in 2003, and was a
post-doc at the University of Rochester for two years before moving to
USC.  Her current research focuses on the comprehension of various
referential forms (including pronouns, reflexives and demonstratives) in
different languages, which she investigates using a range of tools,
including eye-tracking.
