Stephen Tratz (PhD defense practice talk)
Semantically-Enriched Parsing for Natural Language Understanding
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

This thesis details three contributions to the advancement of
semantic-enriched parsing for English sentences: inventories of semantic
relations covering three semantically ambiguous linguistic phenomena,
large datasets annotated according to the inventories, and, finally, a
suite of tools for semantically-enriched parsing built using the data.
For the purposes of this thesis, semantically-enriched parsing is
defined as the reconstruction of the underlying grammatical structure of
text along with shallow semantic annotation of semantically-ambiguous
structures. Ultimately, semantically-enriched parsing is one of the most
critical steps in natural language understanding---the initial step in
which the text is read by the machine into a knowledge representation
for further processing and reasoning.

The first contribution of this thesis is to advance the theoretical
foundations for the interpretation of three ambiguous linguistic
phenomena in English that have significant overlap in terms of the
relations expressed: noun compounds, possessive constructions, and
prepositions. For these, I define inventories of relations based upon
extensive annotation by myself, previous work by others, and
inter-annotator agreement studies. In the case of prepositions, the
relations are created by refining an existing resource whereas the other
two are created from scratch. In addition to mappings to prior work,
mappings are provided across the different inventories in order to
create a unified set of relations.

Second, I produce large datasets annotated according to the
aforementioned sense inventories. Such data is vital for training most
automatic tools and also provides exemplars for the theory embodied in
the inventories. Some of these datasets are created from scratch,
including a collection of over 17,500 noun compounds and a collection of
over 21,900 possessive construction examples. In the case of
prepositions, an existing resource including over 24,000 annotated
examples is refined.

The final contribution is a suite of tools that can construct
semantically-enriched parse trees. The suite is designed to work in a
sequential, pipeline-like fashion and can be thought of as consisting of
two subsections. The first part reconstructs the grammatical structure
of the text using a dependency parser that extends the non-directional
easy-first algorithm developed by Goldberg and Elhadad (2010) in order
to support non-projective trees and is trained using my improved
dependency tree conversion of the Penn Treebank. Second is a semantic
annotation module that adds shallow semantic annotation for noun
compounds, preposition senses, and possessives. Combined, these tools
produce semantically-enriched parse trees that include both grammatical
structure and shallow semantics. The core parser itself achieves
state-of-the-art accuracy and can process over 75 sentences per second,
which is substantially faster than most of the accurate parsers
available today.

In conclusion, this thesis work provides significant contributions to
computational linguistics, both in terms of theory and resources. It
advances our understanding of the relations expressed by three
semantically-ambiguous linguistic phenomena, creates large annotated
datasets useful for machine learning, and produces a fast, accurate, and
informative system for semantically-enriched parsing.

