Marie-Catherine de Marneffe (Stanford University)
Computational models of utterance meaning
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Much of the meaning conveyed in language use goes beyond the literal meaning of the words. Suppose someone asks whether I want to go for lunch, and I reply: "I had a very large breakfast". The utterance does not convey only what it literally means, my interlocutor is probably going to infer that I am not hungry and do not want to go for lunch now. Computational systems today understand at most the literal meaning of human language utterances. I aim at capturing aspects of utterance meaning, the kind of information that a reader will reliably extract from an utterance within text.

The first part of the talk concentrates on interpreting answers to yes/no questions which do not straightforwardly convey a 'yes' or 'no' answer. I focus on questions involving scalar modifiers (Was it acceptable? It was unprecedented.) and numerical answers (Are you kids little? I have a 10 year-old and a 7 year-old.). I exploit the availability of large amount of text to learn meanings from words and sentences in real context. I show that we can ground scalar modifier meaning based on large unstructured databases, and that such meanings can drive pragmatic inference.

The second part of the talk targets veridicality -- whether a speaker intends to convey that the events described are actual, non-actual or uncertain -- which is central to language understanding, but little used in relation and event extraction systems. What do people infer from a sentence such as FBI agents alleged in court documents today that Zazi had admitted receiving weapons and explosives training from al Qaeda operatives? Did Zazi received weapons and explosives training? I show that not only lexical semantic properties but context and world knowledge shape veridicality judgments. Since such judgments are not always categorical, I suggest they should be modeled as distributions, and propose a classifier to do so. The classifier features provide a nuanced picture of the diverse factors that affect veridicality.

Short Bio: 
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe is a fifth-year PhD student in Linguistics at Stanford University. Prior to her
doctoral studies, she visited the Stanford NLP research group for 2 years, working with Christopher D. Manning.
In 2000, she received her master degree in Classical Languages, and a master in Computer Science in 2002,
both from the Université catholique de Louvain (Belgium). Her work in computational semantics focuses on
on detecting entailment and contradiction in texts, grounding meaning from large unstructured databases, and assessing the information status of events from a reader's perspective. She is also interested in language acquisition, studying how
children acquire verb forms in French.
