Gael Dias (University of Caen Basse-Normandie, France)
Cross Domain Subjectivity Classification using Multi-View Learning
4:00 pm - 5:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

In this talk, we will present our research on learning models
with high cross domain accuracy for subjectivity classification. After a
small introduction about related works and challenges of sentiment
analysis, we will start by presenting new features for subjectivity
analysis. Then, we will present two different paradigms of multi-view
learning strategies to learn transfer models: multi-view learning with
agreement and guided multi-view learning. Then, we will present an
exhaustive evaluation based on both paradigms including two
states-of-the-art algorithms and show that accuracy over 91% can be
obtained using three views. In our concluding remarks, we will talk
about future extensions of the presented methodology. Then, we will
briefly present the Human Language Technology team of the GREYC
Laboratory of the University of Caen Basse-Normandie (France) and
present projects that are being studied ans further prospects.

Biography: Gael Dias is full professor at the University of Caen
Basse-Normandie (France). His research interests include unsupervised
methodologies for text mining, information retrieval and text
summarization. His recent research focuses on Sentiment Analysis,
Ontology Learning, Lexical Semantics, Web Personalization and
Collaboration, Temporal Information Retrieval, and Paraphrase Extraction
and Identification. He has served on program committees of international
conferences and workshops such as ACL/HLT 2011, COLING 2010, IJCNLP/ACL
2009, ACL 2007, HLT-NAACL 2007, COLING/ACL 2006 as well as is/was a
reviewer for Information Processing and Management, IEEE Transactions on
Audio, Speech and Language Processing, Natural Language Engineering
Journal, Journal of Language Resources and Evaluation, Journal of
Computer Speech and Language and  ACM Transactions on Speech and
Language Processing.

