Alan Ritter (University of Washington)
Status Messages: A Unique Textual Source of Realtime and Social Information
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Recently there has been an explosion in the number of users posting short status messages on Social Media websites such as Facebook and Twitter.  Although noisy and informal, this new style of text represents a valuable source of information not available elsewhere: it provides the most up-to-date information on current events, in addition to a massive publicly available corpus of naturally occurring human conversations.  In this talk I will present ongoing work which explores both of these aspects.

First, I will describe efforts towards Information Extraction from status messages.  Because statuses can be posted quickly and are widely disseminated, they often provide the most up-to-date source of information on current events around the world and locally.  This dynamically changing source of realtime information is already being processed using keyword extraction techniques, for example the "trends" displayed on Twitter's website provide a list of phrases which are frequent in the current stream of messages.  In order to move beyond a flat list of phrases, we have been investigating the feasibility of applying Information Extraction techniques to produce more structured representations of events.  A key challenge is the noisy nature of this data; unlike newswire, or biomedical text, status messages contain frequent misspellings and abbreviations, inconsistent capitalization, unique grammar, etc...  To deal with these issues, we have been annotating a corpus of Twitter Posts with POS tags and Named Entities, then using these annotations to train Twitter-specific NLP tools.  As a demonstration of their utility, the resulting tools are combined to produce a calendar of popular events occurring in the future.

In addition, I will discuss work which exploits a corpus of roughly 1.3 million naturally occurring conversations collected from Twitter for building models of human conversation.  Three data-driven approaches to generating responses to Twitter status posts are considered, based on either information retrieval or phrase-based statistical machine translation.  Although there are many challenges to overcome in adapting phrase-based SMT to dialogue, we show that it is a promising approach to this problem.  We compare these approaches in a human evaluation, using annotators from Amazon's Mechanical Turk service.  Furthermore, we measure agreement between human evaluators and the BLEU automatic MT evaluation metric.  As far as we are aware, this is the first work to investigate the application of phrase-based SMT to dialogue generation.

Short Bio: Alan Ritter is a graduate student at the University of Washington advised by Oren Etzioni.  His research interests are in Information Extraction, Computational Lexical Semantics, and Language Processing in Social Media.
