Abe Kazemzadeh (USC)
Natural Language Descriptions of Emotions
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

This proposal seeks to explain how humans describe emotions using
natural language. The
focus of the proposal is on words and phrases that refer to emotions,
rather than the more general phenomena of emotional language. The main
problem I address is that if natural language descriptions of emotions
refer to abstract concepts that are local to a particular human (or
agent), then how do these concepts vary from person to person and how
can shared meaning be established between people. The thesis of the
proposal is that natural
language emotion descriptions are definite descriptions that refer to
theoretical objects, which provide a logical framework for dealing
with this phenomenon in scientific experiments
and engineering solutions. An experiment, Emotion Twenty Questions
(EMO20Q), was devised to study the social natural language behavior of
humans, who must use descriptions of emotions to play the familiar
game of twenty questions when the unknown word is an emotion.
The idea of a theory based on natural language propositions is
developed and used to formalize the knowledge of a sign-using agent.
Based on this pilot data, it was seen that approximately 25% of the
emotion descriptions referred to emotions as objects with dimensional
attributes, similarity, or subsethood. This motivated the author to
use interval type-2 fuzzy sets as a computational model for the
conceptual meaning of emotion descriptions. This model introduces a
definition of a variable that ranges over emotions and allows for both
inter- and intra-subject variability. A second experiment used
interval surveys and translation tasks to assess this model. Finally,
the author proposes the use of spectral graph theory to represent
emotional knowledge as a network of proposition nodes that are
connected  to emotion nodes based on data from EMO20Q.

Short Bio: Abe Kazemzadeh is a PhD student at the USC Computer Science Dept and a
research assistant at the the Signal Analysis and Interpretation
Laboratory (SAIL). His interests include natural language, logic,
emotions, games, and algebra.
