Christopher Thomas (Wright State University)
What Goes Around Comes Around -- Improving the State of Knowledge on the Web through On-Demand Model Creation
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Information extraction is concerned with the retrieval of structured information from unstructured sources. Knowledge extraction/acquisition will need to go a step further by testing whether the extracted information is actually true. Since none of the extraction systems in current use can guarantee a perfect precision, it is necessary to incorporate manual verification steps into the information extraction pipeline in order to use extracted facts in further reasoning. My talk will present a framework that adopts a cyclic approach to advancing the state of factual knowledge within a system, taking advantage of available formal/structured knowledge sources, information extraction and human/social computing to verify the extracted information. For the fact extraction part, the system uses LoD as training data, a domain hierarchy extractor to delineate domain boundaries and non-NLP surface-pattern-based open IE techniques to connect concepts within the hierarchy. To combat the low recall that most IE approaches face, the system deploys generalization techniques and pertinence computation to increase the number of patterns. Verification is done by means of information use under the assumption that correct information will be utilized more often than incorrect one. 

Bio:
Christopher Thomas is a PhD candidate in the Kno.e.sis Center at Wright State University. His research is in epistemological aspects of Computer Science and Artificial intelligence, namely knowledge extraction, representation, verification and dissemination. To build a coherent framework for this kind of systems epistemology, his publications span technical work on ontology design, ontology learning, information quality and information extraction as well as conceptual work on knowledge representation and social computing methods for knowledge verification.
