Cerstin Mahlow (University of Zurich)
Linguistically supported editing and revising: concept and prototypical implementation based on interactive NLP resources
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Composing, revising, and editing are highly demanding tasks. Even in polished
and published texts from professional writers we can observe errors and mistakes.
For many errors, we can infer how they came to be: Word processors offer
character-based functions only. These functions do not take into account
elements and structures of the language the author is using. Authors are thus
forced to translate their high-level goals into long and complex sequences
of low-level character-based functions. Both the translation process and the
execution of such sequences of functions are error-prone.

However, in text editors for programmers ww find so-called language-aware
editing functions. These functions operate on the elements and structures of a
programming or mark-up language and help to avoid errors, as language-aware
functions make revising and editing less tedious and error-prone.

We argue that the concept of language awareness can be transferred to writing
natural language texts using word processors. We propose functions that take the
structures of natural languages into consideration. We distinguish information
functions, movement functions, and operations to support revising and editing.
The design is based on current findings from writing research.

Language-aware editing functions rely on the recognition and categorization
of relevant elements and structures with respect to a certain language. We
use methods and resources from computational linguistics for morphological
analysis and generation, and for part-of-speech tagging. When evaluating
respective resources we face a rather disappointing situation: NLP resources
for German are less suitable than assumed and less applicable for real-world
applications than usually claimed in the literature.

Our prototypical implementation of language-aware functions for revising and
editing of German texts serves as a proof of concept. The implementation
illustrates opportunities and limits of current NLP resources for German.
