Liang Huang
Efficient Search and Learning for Language Understanding and Translation
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
6th Floor Large Conference Room [689]


What is in common between translating from English into Chinese and
compiling C++ into machine code? And yet what are the differences that
make the former so much harder for computers? How can computers learn
from human translators?

This talk sketches an efficient (linear-time) "understanding +
rewriting" paradigm for machine translation inspired by both human
translators as well as compilers. In this paradigm, a source language
sentence is first parsed into a syntactic tree, which is then
recursively converted into a target language sentence via
tree-to-string rewriting rules. In both "understanding" and
"rewriting" stages, this paradigm closely resembles the efficiency and
incrementality of both human processing and compiling. We will discuss
these two stages in turn.

First, for the "understanding" part, we present a linear-time
approximate dynamic programming algorithm for incremental parsing that
is as accurate as those much slower (cubic-time) chart parsers, while
being as fast as those fast but lossy greedy parsers, thus getting the
advantages of both worlds for the first time, achieving
state-of-the-art speed and accuracy. But how do we efficiently learn
such a parsing model with approximate inference from huge amounts of
data? We propose a general framework for structured prediction based
on the structured perceptron that is guaranteed to succeed with
inexact search and works well in practice.

Next, the "rewriting" stage translates these source-language parse
trees into the target language. But parsing errors from the previous
stage adversely affect translation quality. An obvious solution is to
use the top-k parses, rather than the 1-best tree, but this only helps
a little bit due to the limited scope of the k-best list. We instead
propose a "forest-based approach", which translates a packed forest
encoding *exponentially* many parses in a polynomial space by sharing
common subtrees. Large-scale experiments showed very significant
improvements in terms of translation quality, which outperforms the
leading systems in literature. Like the "understanding" part, the
translation algorithm here is also linear-time and incremental, thus
resembles human translation.
