Christian Chiarcos
Linguistic Linked Open Data. Linking Corpora
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Conference Room [1135]

In the last 15 years, the interoperability of language resources has
been recognized as a major problem in the development of NLP
infrastructures -- partly due to an increased focus on novel,
underresourced languages and efforts to bootstrap language resources
by annotation projection -- partly due to the increased interest in
more abstract levels of linguistic analysis beyond morphosyntax and
syntax, namely semantics, reference and discourse.

This talk describes the application of Semantic Web formalisms, RDF,
OWL/DL and SPARQL, to facilitate the interoperability of linguistic
corpora and linguistic annotations. Interoperability of linguistic
corpora involves two aspects: Structural interoperability (annotations
of different origin are represented using the same formalism) and
conceptual interoperability (annotations of different origin are
linked to a common vocabulary). I will describe ontology-based
approaches for both aspects, the POWLA ontology that defines a data
model for annotated corpora, and the Ontologies of Linguistic
Annotation (OLiA) that provide definitions for linguistic categories
and properties (Chiarcos 2012). As compared to state-of-the-art
approaches based on standoff XML, e.g., the recently published ISO
standard for an Linguistic Annotation Framework, key advantages of
this approach include the existence of a rich technological ecosystem
developed around RDF and OWL, including standardized query languages
for directed acyclic (multi-) graphs (SPARQL), APIs, data base
implementations, as well as the availability of OWL reasoners that can
be applied to validate the consistency of linguistic corpora and their
annotations and to infer additional information that is relevant, for
example, for their appropriate visualization.

Naturally, representing corpora in OWL and RDF also allows to
interlink resources freely, e.g., different annotation layers of a
multi-layer corpus, translated texts in parallel corpora, or
linguistic corpora and lexical-semantic resources. Modeled in this
way, corpora can be fully integrated in a Linked Open Data (sub-)cloud
of linguistic resources, along with lexical-semantic resources and
knowledge bases of information about languages and linguistic
terminology. The second part of my talk will introduce recent efforts
to create a Linked Open Data sub-cloud of linguistic resources, the
Linguistic Linked Open Data cloud (Chiarcos et al. 2012, cf.
http://linguistics.okfn.org).

References

Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Hellmann, Sebastian Nordhoff, et al.
(2012), The Open Linguistics Working Group, Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012). Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.
[http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/912_Paper.pdf]

Christian Chiarcos (2012), Interoperability of Corpora and
Annotations, In: Christian Chiarcos, Sebastian Nordhoff, and Sebastian
Hellmann (eds.) Linked Data in Linguistics. Representing and
Connecting Language Data and Language Metadata. Springer, Heidelberg.
[http://www.springer.com/computer/ai/book/978-3-642-28248-5]

Bio

Christian Chiarcos studied Computer Science and General Linguistics at
the Technical University Berlin, Germany, and received his PhD in
Computational Linguistics from the University of Potsdam, Germany in
2010. He is currently affiliated with the University of Frankfurt/M.,
Germany. Since April 2012, he is visiting scholar at the ISI. His
primary areas of expertese include the study and modeling of discourse
semantics, as well as the development of infrastructures for rich and
heterogeneous linguistic annotations.
