Abe Kazemzadeh
Natural Language Description of Emotion (Ph.D. Thesis Defense Practice Talk)
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

This dissertation studies how people describe emotions with language
and how computers can simulate this descriptive behavior.  Although
many non-human animals can express their current emotions as social
signals, only humans can communicate about emotions symbolically.
This symbolic communication of emotion allows us to talk about
emotions that we may not currently be feeling, for example describing
emotions that occurred in the past, gossiping about the emotions of
others, and reasoning about emotions hypothetically.  Another feature of this
descriptive behavior is that we talk about emotions as if they were
discrete entities, even though we may not always have necessary and
sufficient observational cues to distinguish one emotion from another,
or even to say what is and is not an emotion. This motivates us to
focus on aspects of meaning that are learned primarily through
language interaction rather than by observations through the senses.
To capture these intuitions about how people describe emotions, we
propose the following thesis: natural language descriptions of emotion
are definite descriptions that refer to intersubjective theoretical entities.

We support our thesis using theoretical, experimental, computational
results. The theoretical arguments use Russell's notion of definite
descriptions, Carnap's notion of theoretical entities, and the
question-asking period in child language acquisition. The experimental
data we collected include dialogs between humans and computers and
web-based surveys, both using crowd-sourcing on Amazon Mechanical
Turk. The computational models include a dialog agent based on
sequential Bayesian belief update within a generalized pushdown automaton, 
as well as a fuzzy logic model of similarity and subsethood between emotion terms.

For future work, we propose a research agenda that includes a
continuation of work on the emotion domain as well as new work on
other domains where subjective descriptions are established through
natural language communication.


Short Bio:
Abe Kazemzadeh is a PhD candidate at the USC Computer Science Dept and
a research assistant at the the Signal Analysis and Interpretation
Laboratory (SAIL). His interests include natural language, logic,
emotions, games, and algebra. He is currently the chief technology
officer at the USC Annenberg Innovation Laboratory (AIL).

