Hans Chalupsky (USC/ISI)
Story-Level Inference to Improve Machine Reading
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Extracting well-defined entities and relations that hold between them from
unstructured text is an important prerequisite for a variety of tasks such as
knowledge base population, question answering, data analytics, visualization,
etc.  The difficulty of this problem is evidenced by the annual TAC-KBP
evaluations organized by NIST, where the best-performing systems in the
slot-filling task still only achieve an f-value in the high 30's.  These high
error rates on individual relations get further compounded once relations
have to be joined to answer a question.

State-of-the art statistical information extraction techniques focus primarily
on the phrase and sentence level to extract entities and relations between
them, and are generally ignorant of the greater context around them.  We
present a new approach which aggregates locally extracted information into a
larger story context and uses abductive reasoning to generate the best
story-level interpretation.  We demonstrate that this approach can
significantly improve relation extraction and question answering performance
on complex questions.  We will also describe ongoing work to apply this type
of inference to the TAC Knowledge Base Population task in order to improve
relation extraction and coreference resolution.


Bio:

Hans Chalupsky is a project leader at the Information Sciences Institute of
the University of Southern California, where he leads the Loom Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning Group.  He holds a Master's degree in computer
science from the Vienna University of Technology, Austria and a Ph.D. in
computer science from the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Dr. Chalupsky has over 25 years of experience in the design, development and
application of knowledge representation and reasoning systems such as
PowerLoom, and he is the principal architect of the KOJAK Link Discovery
System.  His research interests include knowledge representation and reasoning
systems, natural language processing, knowledge and link discovery, anomaly
detection and semantic interoperability.
