Claire Bonial (University of Colorado, Boulder)
Take a look at this!  Form, Function and Productivity of English Light Verb Constructions
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
6th Floor Large Conference Room [689]
 
English light verb constructions (LVCs), such as have a drink, make an offer, take a bath, do an investigation, and give a groan, represent a powerfully expressive type of Multi-Word Expression (MWE) in English; however, the precise definition, semantic function and productivity of English LVCs remain unclear, hampering efforts to treat LVCs appropriately in Natural Language Processing (NLP) resources.  This research focuses on exploring these three issues.  A definition for LVCs that combines syntactic and semantic criteria is developed, initially based on existing research on delimiting and defining LVCs, and iteratively refined during the development of an LVC annotation schema for the PropBank project (Palmer et al., 2005).  Existing theories on the linguistic function of LVCs both cross-linguistically and in English are discussed, and a corpus study of LVCs provides evidence that the primary function of LVCs in English is to enable speakers to describe events in a manner that can take advantage of rich nominal modification; for example, The inspector general did a rather controversial investigation...  Finally, a dominant hypothesis concerning the productivity of certain verbal constructions is investigated in relation to LVCs, using large-scale Mechanical Turk surveys.  This firstly probes the question of why “families” of semantically similar LVCs occur (e.g. make a statement/speech/declaration/proposal), but other arguably similar LVCs are odd to speakers (e.g. ?make a yell/hint).  Secondly, this provides the groundwork for better detection of very low frequency LVCs that arise from a speaker’s ability to shift and extend verbal meanings within novel constructions.  The contributions of these findings on both NLP and linguistic theory are presented. 
 
Bio:
Claire Bonial is in the final weeks of her academic adventure at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and will soon be graduating with a joint PhD in Linguistics and Cognitive Science.  Claire has had a rich academic and professional experience at CU, including collaborative research with Martha Palmer on a variety of Natural Language Processing (NLP) resources, such as PropBank and VerbNet.  Although Claire has served in many roles on these projects, her primary contribution has been theoretical research on English Light Verb Constructions (LVCs, e.g. take a walk, make a mistake).  Specifically, she has worked to improve the coverage and treatment of this type of multi-word expression.  Two years ago, Claire began working with Kevin Knight and ISI on the Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) project, which has since afforded her several lovely trips to Marina del Rey, as well as the opportunity to apply her linguistic expertise in the development of this exciting and challenging project. 

Webcast Link:
http://webcasterms1.isi.edu/mediasite/Viewer/?peid=c389f52cfb16424facb6386ff180de771d