Atefeh Farzindar (NLP Technologies)
TRANSLI, NLP-based social media analytics and monitoring
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
6th Floor Large Conference Room [689]

NLP Technologies have developed a technology for automated analysis of social media data. TRANSLI Social Media Analytics and monitoring, is an online visual analytics system designed to provide social intelligence from news and other events from Twitter. During this seminar, Dr. Atefeh Farzindar will give a presentation on TRANSLI-SM where the system features an intuitive user interface and is designed to browse and visualise the results of the semantic analysis of social discussion on specific events from Twitter. The user can obtain the information not only limited to the main event of interest but also to the intelligence for the sub events.

About NLP technologies

NLP Technologies Inc. is a Canadian company founded in 2005 and that expanded to California in 2014. The company specialises in natural language processing, NLP-based search engines, translation technologies and services, social media analytics, and automatic summarization.
http://www.nlptechnologies.ca/


Bio: Dr. Atefeh Farzindar, CEO NLP Technologies Inc. 
and Adjunct professor at University of Montreal
Dr. Atefeh Farzindar is the co-founder and CEO of NLP Technologies. She received her PhD in Computer Science from the University of Montreal and her Doctorate in automatic summarization of legal documents from Paris-Sorbonne University in 2005. She has been an Adjunct professor at the Department of Computer Science at the University of Montreal since 2010, and she was Honorary Research Fellowship at the Research Group in Computational Linguistics at the University of Wolverhampton, UK (2010-2012).

Dr. Farzindar has been Action Editor in the international journal of Computational Intelligence since 2011. She co-edited two special issues on social media analysis for the International Journal of Computational Intelligence (CI) and Journal TAL, an international journal on natural language processing. 

She co-authored an upcoming book on Natural Language Processing for Social Media [Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2014], and authored a book chapter in Social Network Integration in Document Summarization, Innovative Document Summarization Techniques: Revolutionizing Knowledge Understanding, IGI Global publisher January 2014.

In 2013, Dr. Farzindar won  Femmessor-Montréal’s contest,  Succeeding with a balanced lifestyle, in the  Innovative Technology and Information and Communications Technology category because of her involvement in the arts. Her paintings have recently been published in a book titled One Thousand and One Nights, in which the palette of vivid colours and her unique contemporary style revolved around on the place of women in modern society (Vernissage & Artist Book Launch April, Montréal, Galerie 203 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TLCghx1mvzY)
