Radu Soricut (Google)
Multimodal Machine Comprehension: Tasks and Approaches
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

The ability of computer models to achieve genuine understanding of information as presented to humans (text, images, etc) is a long-standing goal of Artificial Intelligence. Along the way towards this goal, the research community has proposed solving tasks such as machine reading comprehension and computer image understanding. In this talk, we introduce two new tasks that can help us move closer to the goal. First, we present a multi-choice reading comprehension task, for which the goal is to understand a text passage and choose the correct summarizing sentence from among several options. Second, we present a multi-modal understanding task, posed as a combined vision-language comprehension challenge: identifying the most suitable text describing a visual scene, given several similar options. We present several baseline and competitive learning approaches based on neural network architectures, illustrating the utility of the proposed tasks in advancing both image and language comprehension. We also present human evaluation results, which inform a performance upper-bound on these tasks, and quantify the remaining gap between computer systems and human performance (spoiler alert: we are not there yet).

Radu Soricut is a Staff Research Scientist in the Research and Machine Intelligence group at Google. Radu has a PhD in Computer Science from University of Southern California, and has been with Google since 2012. His main areas of interest are natural language understanding, multilingual processing, natural language generation (from multimodal inputs), and general machine learning techniques for solving these problems. Radu has published extensively in these areas in top-tier peer-reviewed conferences and journals, and has won the Best Paper Award at the North American Association for Computational Linguistics Conference (NAACL) in 2015. Radu's current project looks at bridging natural language understanding and generation using neural techniques, in the context of Google's focus on making natural language an effective way of interacting with the world and the technology around us.