Sameer Singh (UCI)
Intuitive Interactions with Black-box Machine Learning
3:00 pm - 4:00 pm
11th Floor Large Conference Room [1135]

Machine learning is at the forefront of many recent advances in natural language processing, enabled in part by the sophisticated models and algorithms that have been recently introduced. However, as a consequence of this complexity, machine learning essentially acts as a black-box as far as users are concerned. It is incredibly difficult to understand, predict, or "fix" the behavior of NLP models that have been deployed. In this talk, I propose interpretable representations that allow users and machine learning models to interact with each other: enabling machine learning models to provided explanations as to why a specific prediction was made and enabling users to inject domain knowledge into machine learning. The first part of the talk introduces an approach to estimate local, interpretable explanations for black-box classifiers and describes an approach to summarize the behavior of the classifier by selecting which explanations to show to the user. I will also briefly describe work on "closing the loop", i.e. allowing users to provide feedback on the explanations to improve the model, for the task of relation extraction, an important subtask of natural language processing. In particular, we introduce approaches to both explain the relation extractor using logical statements and to inject symbolic domain knowledge into relational embeddings to improve the predictions. I present experiments to demonstrate that an interactive interface is effective in providing users an understanding of, and an ability to improve, complex black-box machine learning systems.

Bio: Sameer Singh is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the University of California, Irvine. He is working on large-scale and interactive machine learning applied to information extraction and natural language processing. Till recently, Sameer was a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Washington. He received his PhD from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst in 2014, during which he also interned at Microsoft Research, Google Research, and Yahoo! Labs on massive-scale machine learning. He was selected as a DARPA Riser, was awarded the Adobe Research Data Science Award, won the grand prize in the Yelp dataset challenge, has been awarded the Yahoo! Key Scientific Challenges fellowship, and was a finalist for the Facebook PhD fellowship. Sameer has published more than 30 peer-reviewed papers at top-tier machine learning and natural language processing conferences and workshops.
